This section shows design, description, and test of a small processor in Verilog. The CPU is simple architecture, yet enough hardware (SAYEH) that has been designed for educational and benchmarking purposes. The design is simple, and follows the design strategy used for the Adding CPU of the previous section. For a better understanding of the material presented here, the reader is expected to have a general understanding of computer architectures. 8.3.1 Details of processor functionality The simple CPU example discussed here has a register file that is used for data processing instructions. The CPU has a 16-bit data bus and a 16-bit address bus. The processor has 8 and 16-bit instructions. Short instructions contain shadow instructions, which effectively pack two such instructions into a 16-bit word. Figure 8.29 shows SAYEH interface signals. 8.3.1.1 CPU components. SAYEH uses its register file for most of its data instructions. Addressing modes of this processor also take advantage of this structure. Because of this, the addressing hardware of SAYEH is a simple one and the register file output is used in address calculations. SAYEH components that are used by its instructions include the standard registers such as the Program Counter, Instruction Register, the Arithmetic Logic Unit, and Status Register. In addition, this processor has a register file forming registers R0, R1, R2, and R3 as well as a Window Pointer that defines R0, R1, R2, and R3 within the register file. CPU components and a brief description of each are shown below. PC. Program Counter, 16 bits R0, R1, R2, and R3. General purpose registers part of the register file, 16 bits Reg ?le. The general purpose registers form a window of 4 in a register file of 8 registers WP. Window Pointer points to the register file to define R0, R1, R2, and R3, 3 bits IR. Instruction Register that is loaded with a 16-bit, an 8-bit, or two 8-bit instructions, 16 bits ALU. The ALU that can AND, OR, NOT, Shift, Compare, Add, Subtract, and Multiply its inputs, 16 bit operands Z ?ag. Becomes 1 when the ALU output is 0 C ?ag. Becomes 1 when the ALU has a carry output 8.3.1.2 SAYEH instructions. The general format of 8-bit and 16-bit SAYEH instructions is shown in Fig. 8.30. The 16-bit instructions have the Immediate field and the 8-bit instructions do not. The OPCODE filed is a 4-bit code that specifies the type of instruction. The Left and Right fields are two bit codes selecting R0 through R3 for source and/or destination of an instruction. Usually, Left is used for destination and Right for source. The Immediate field is used for immediate data, or if two 8-bit instructions are packed, it is used for the second instruction. Our processor has a total of 29 instructions as shown in Table 8.1. Instructions with the ˇ°I ˇ± immediate field indicator are 16-bit instructions and the rest are 8-bit instructions. Instructions that use the Destination and Source fields (designated by D and S in the table of instruction set) have an opcode that is limited to 4 bits. Instructions that do not require specification of source and destination registers use these fields as opcode extensions. Because of this, our processor has room for extending its instruction set beyond what is shown in Table 8.1. In addition to nop, hex code 0F is used as filler for the right most 8-bits of a 16-bit word that only contains an 8-bit instruction in its 8 left-most bits. In the instruction set, addressed locations in the memory are indicated by enclosing the address in a set of parenthesis. When these instructions are executed, the processor issues ReadMem or WriteMem signals to the memory. When input and output instructions (inp, oup) are executed, SAYEH issues ReadIO or WriteIO signals to its IO devices. 8.3.2 SAYEH datapath The datapath of SAYEH is shown in Fig. 8.31. Main components and their lower-level structures are listed below. 1. Addressing Unit a. Program counter (PC) b. Address Logic 2. Instruction register (IR) 3. Window pointer (WP) 4. Register File c. Decoder1 (Left) d. Decoder2 (Right) 5. Arithmetic logic unit (ALU) 6. Flags As shown in Fig. 8.31, components are either hardwired or connected through three-state busses. Component inputs with multiple sources, such as the right-hand side input of ALU, use three-state buses. Threestate busses in this structure are Dastabus and OpndBus. Names shown on component interconnections are used in the Verilog description of the processor. In this figure, signals that are in italic are control signals issued by the controller. These signals control register clocking, logic unit operations and placement of data in busses.

8.3.2.1 Datapath components. Figure 8.32 shows the hierarchical structure of SAYEH components. The processor has a Datapath and a Controller. Datapath components are Addressing Unit, Instruction Register, Window Pointer, Register File, Arithmetic Logic Unit, and the Flags register. The Addressing Unit is further partitioned into the Program Counter and Address Logic. The Addressing Logic is a combinational circuit that is capable of adding its inputs to generate a 16-bit output that forms the address for the processor memory. The Program Counter and Instruction Register are 16-bit registers. The Register File is a 2-port memory and a file of 8, 16-bit registers. The Window Pointer is a 3-bit register that is used as the base of the Register File. Specific registers for read and write (R0, R1, R2, or R3) in the Register File are selected by its 4-bit input bus coming from the Instruction Register. 2 bits are used to select a source register and the other 2 bits select the destination register. When the Window Pointer is enabled, it adds its 3-bit input to its current input. The Flags register is a 2-bit register that saves the flag outputs of the Arithmetic Unit. The Arithmetic Unit is a 16-bit arithmetic and logic unit that has the functions, as shown in Table 8.2. A 9-bit input selects the function of the ALU shown in this table. This code is provided by the processor controller. Controller of SAYEH has eleven states for reset, fetch, decode, execute, and halt operations. Signals generated by the controller control logic unit operations and register clocking in the datapath. SAYEH sequential data components and its controller are triggered on the falling edge of the main system clock. Control signals remain active after one falling edge through the next. This duration allows for propagation of signals through the busses and logic units in the datapath.
8.3.3 SAYEH Verilog description SAYEH is described according to the hierarchical structure of Fig. 8.32. Data components are described separately, and then wired to form the datapath. The controller is described in a single Verilog module. In the complete SAYEH description, the datapath and controller are wired together. 8.3.3.1 Data components. Combinational and sequential SAYEH data components are described here. The combinational ones are like the ALU that perform arithmetic and logical operations. The function of such units is controlled by the controller. The sequential components are clocked with the negative edge of the main CPU clock. These components have functionalities like loading and resetting that are controlled by the controller. Addressing unit. The Addressing Unit, shown in Fig. 8.33, consists of the PC and Address Logic. The PC is a simple register with enabling and resetting mechanisms, while the Address Logic is a small arithmetic unit that performs adding and incrementing for calculating PC or memory addresses. This unit has a 16-bit input coming from the Register File, an 8-bit input from the Instruction Register, and a 16-bit address output. Control signals of the Addressing Unit are ResetPC, PCplusI, PCplus1, RplusI, Rplus0, and PCenable. These control signals select what goes on the output of this unit. Shown in Fig. 8.34 is the Verilog code of the PC. The Address Logic of Fig. 8.35 uses control signal inputs of the Addressing Unit to generate input data to the Program Counter via the PCout of Fig. 8.33. Arithmetic unit. The ALU of SAYEH is shown in Fig. 8.36. For readability, control input codes of this unit are defined according to their function. For example, the select input that causes the ALU to perform the add operation is 0000001000, and it is defined as AaddBH. Control inputs of this unit are B15to0, AandB, AorB, notB, shlB, shrB, AaddB, AsubB, AmulB, and AcmpB that select its various operations. In order to insure that no unwanted latches are made, all ALU outputs are set to their inactive values at the beginning of the always statement of its Verilog code. In a case-statement in this code, aluout and its flag outputs are set according to the selected control input of the ALU. Instruction register. SAYEH Instruction Register is shown in Fig. 8.37. This unit is a 16-bit register with an active high load-enable input. As shown the only control input of the InstructionRegister module is IRload. Register ?le. Figure 8.38 shows the Verilog code of SAYEH Register File. This is a 2-port memory with a moving window pointer. For reading from the memory, the base of the window pointer (Base) is added to the left and right addresses (Laddress and Raddress) and memory words are read on appropriate left and right outputs (Lout and Rout). Writing into the memory is done in the location pointed by its left address (left is used for instruction destinations). The RFLwrite and RFHwrite control signals decide whether a write is done to the low order or the high order bits of the Register File. If both these signals are active, writing is done in a 16-bit word addressed by Laddress plus Base.
8.3.3.2 SAYEH datapath. Figure 8.39 shows the datapath of SAYEH module. This module specifies component instantiations and bussing structure of the CPU according to the diagram of Fig. 8.31. Inputs of this module are the processorˇŻs data and address busses, as well as control signals that are provided by the controller of the CPU. Control signals shown in the DataPath module are routed to the instantiated data components or to the internal buses that are specified in this module. Following the declarations, the DataPath module instantiates Addressing Unit, Arithmetic Unit, Register File, Instruction Register, Status Register, and the Window Pointer. Control signals that are inputs of the DataPath are passed from this module to the data components via their port connections. For example, ResetPC that is an input of DataPath and a control signal of AddressingUnit appears on the port list of AddressingUnit in its instantiation statement. The part that follows module instantiations makes bus assignments to the internal buses of this module. For example, assignment of the output of ArithmeticUnit to Databus that is controlled by ALU_on_Databus is done by an assign statement with a right-hand side that is a conditional expression. Note the assignment of 16'bZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ to Databus when none of the control signals of this bus are active. In the last part of the DataPath module, bits of IR that indicate source and destination registers to the Register File are placed on Laddr and Raddr inputs of this register. The Shadow signal becomes 1 if a shadow instruction being executed is used to select appropriate bits of the IR as source and destination addresses. 8.3.3.3 SAYEH controller. The controller of SAYEH is a state machine with nine states that issues appropriate control signals to the Data Path. The controller uses the Huffman style of coding, in which the state machine has a large combinational part that is responsible for state transitions and issuing controller outputs. State transitions are done by setting next state values to the Nstate variable of reg type. Figure 8.40 shows a general outline of this controller. Various sections of this outline are discussed below.
Controller ports. The instruction register output, ALU flags, and external control signals constitute the inputs of the controller. The outputs of the controller are 38 control signals going to the Data Path and a Shadow output that indicates that the controller is handling a shadow instruction. As shown in Fig. 8.40, controller outputs are declared as reg and are assigned values in the combinational always block of the controller module. Control states. A parameter declaration declares the nine states of the controller. States reset and halt are for the initial state of the machine and its halt state, respectively. In state fetch the machine begins fetching a 16-bit instruction that can include an 8-bit instruction and a shadow. State memread is entered while our controller is waiting for memDataReady signal from the memory indicating that its data is ready. Execution of instructions is performed in the exec1 state. This state is entered from the memread state. The lda instruction is not completed by the exec1 state and requires the additional state of exec1lda to complete its memory read. States exec2 and exec2lda are like exec1 and exec1lda except that they handle the shadow part of an instruction. The execute state of most instructions (exec1 or exec2) increments the program counter while the instruction is being executed. However, certain instructions that use the address bus for their execution cannot increment PC while they are being executed. For these instructions, the incpc state increments the program counter. Opcodes. Referring to Fig. 8.40, instruction opcodes are declared as 4-bit parameters in the controller of SAYEH. These parameters are according to the processorˇŻs instruction set of Table 8.1. State declarations. As mentioned, the coding style of the controller is according to the Huffman style of coding discussed in Chap. 5. The next state and present states, required by this style of coding, are declared in the controller of SAYEH as 4-bit registers, Nstate, and Pstate. Shadow instructions. The ShadowEn signal that is internal to the controller is set when the hex code 0F (this code indicates that the rightmost bits are not used) is not found in the right-most 8 bits of a 16-bit instruction. If this wire is 1 and execution of an 8-bit instruction is complete, the controller branches to exec2 to execute the second half of the instruction before the next fetching begins. Combinational block. The combinational block of SAYEH controller has an always block that has a main case statement with case choices for every state of the machine. Transitions from one state to another and issuing control signals are performed in the case statement. At the beginning of the always statement, all control signals are set to their inactive values in order to avoid latches on these outputs. Sequential block. The last part of the code outline of Fig. 8.40 is the sequential always block for clocking Pstate into Nstate. The control state register of SAYEH and all its data registers are falling edge triggered. Control signals issues by the controller remain active through the next falling edge of the system clock. Instruction execution. Figure 8.41 zooms on the combinational always statement of the controller module and shows the details of execution of mvr in the exec1 state of the controller. Signals issued for the execution of this instruction are shown in this figure. This instruction reads a word from the right address of the Register File and writes it into its left address. The right and left (source and destination) addresses are provided in the Data Path by connections made from IR to the Register File. The RFright_on_OpndBus control signal is issued to read the source register from RegisterFile onto OpndBus. Since this bus is the input of the ALU, the data on the right input (B) of the ALU must pass through it to reach its output. For this purpose, the B15to0 control input of ALU is issued. Once the data reaches the ALU output, it becomes available at the input of the Register File. Issuing RFLwrite and RFHwrite cause data to be written into the destination into RegisterFile. The partial code of Fig. 8.41 shows the assignment of exec2 to Nstate if the instruction we are executing has a shadow. Otherwise, signals for incrementing the Program Counter are issued and the next state is set to fetch. The execution discussed here applies to most SAYEH instructions. However, instructions that require memory access, e.g., lda, require an extra clock for reading the memory. The first part of the execution of lda is shown in Fig. 8.41. As shown, for the execution of this instruction, the address is read from Register File and put on the address bus. At the same time, ReadMem is issued to initiate the memory read process. The next state for execution of lda after exec1 is exec1lda shown in the partial code of Fig. 8.42. In this state, ReadMem continues to be issued and state remains in exec1lda until memDataReady becomes 1. In this case, memory data that is available on Databus will be clocked into RegisterFile by issuing RFLwrite and RFHwrite. Executions of other SAYEH instructions are similar to the examples we discussed. The complete Verilog code of SAYEH controller is over 800 lines and is included in the CD that accompanies this book. 8.3.3.4 Complete SAYEH processor. The top-level Verilog code of SAYEH that is shown in Fig. 8.43 consists of instantiation of DataPath and controller modules. In the Sayeh module, control signal outputs of controller are wired to the similarly named signals of DataPath. The ports of the processor are according to the block diagram of Fig. 8.29. 8.3.4 SAYEH top-level testbench The complete Verilog description of SAYEH consists of component descriptions like registers, counters, logic units, and a state machine for its controller. Chapter 6 has shown how such components can be tested with testbenches for data application and assertion monitoring. Obviously testing SAYEH begins with testing its components using such techniques. On the other hand, a complete test of the processor when all its tested components are put together is still necessary. This section discusses top-level testing of SAYEH. In a testbench, we instantiate SAYEH, and through a memory model, we apply instructions to the CPU and watch its response to these test instructions. For developing such a top-level testbench that is easy for the design engineer to work with, two issues must be considered: Test data format and memory size handling. Test data format must be at a high level so that the designer testing the CPU can apply large volumes of instructions and data to the CPU. For this purpose, our testbench takes test data in the form of SAYEH instructions and translates them to binary data for the processor to be tested. This scheme was used for our simple AddingCPU and was discussed in the previous section. SAYEH testbench has such a translation program that is, of course, much larger than that of AddingCPU. The other issue that must be considered for a testbench for this design is memory size handling. Recall that our AddingCPU example did all its reading and writings directly into an external file representing its complete memory. Having the complete memory image in one file is not practical for the relatively large size of SAYEH memory. Furthermore, moving the complete memory image of the processor being tested into its testbench and declaring it as a two dimensional reg requires too much memory of the computer performing the simulation. In a large design, the actual memory of a design being tested may be larger than the computer it is being tested on. In developing a testbench for SAYEH, we focus on the issue of memory size handling discussed above. Instead of having all memory image in one file, or all of it declared as a reg, we take an in-between approach. We partition the memory of the circuit being tested (SAYEH CPU, in our case) into several pages, and use one file for each page. The file corresponding to a page is named according to the page number it represents. Then, the actual testbench declares a reg of the size of only one such page. This reg is regarded as a buffer. When the CPU model addresses a memory location, the testbench checks to see if that is available in the buffer. If so, data from the buffer will be read or written into according to the CPU request. On the other hand, if a memory location is addressed that is not in the buffer, the testbench writes the contents of the buffer into its corresponding memory file, and loads the page that has the addressed location into the buffer. Figure 8.44 shows the overall structure of our testbench. The sections that follow discuss the details of the Verilog code of this testbench. The complete code of this testbench is included in the CD that accompanies this book. 8.3.4.1 Testbench Verilog outline. The outline of the Verilog code of SAYEH testbench is shown in Fig. 8.45. This code corresponds to the diagram of Fig. 8.44. The SayehTestbench module declares totalAddrLen and pageLen parameters for the total number of address lines, and address lines that are only considered for page addressing. With these parameters, the total memory being handled is 216, there are 24 pages, and each page is 216?4 = 4096 words. The Verilog code of Fig. 8.45 shows SayehRAM declared as a memory of 4096 16-bit words. This reg is the memory buffer that contains one of the 16 pages of the memory. The initial statement shown in the testbench of SAYEH is responsible for reading an instruction file, initializing test signals, and controlling the simulation start and stop times. 8.3.4.2 Instruction translation. The Translate task called in the initial block of Fig. 8.45 handles translation of instructions to hex. The instruction input file is inst.mem and hex files are memFileXX.mem, where XX is 00 to 15 representing memory file pages. Instruction and data read from inst.mem are translated to hex and placed in appropriate locations in the corresponding memory pages. At the end, the Translate task generates 16 files representing the complete image of the initial memory of SAYEH. Except for the page handling, the Translate task of SAYEH testbench is similar to Convert of AddingCPU testbench. Translate handles more instructions (all of SAYEH instructions) and writes 16-bit data into its hexadecimal files. As in Convert, if instead of a mnemonic, ˇ°:::ˇ± appears in a line of inst.mem, Translate treats it as a directive for writing data directly into the specified memory location. 8.3.4.3 Memory read procedure. The MemoryRead always block of Fig. 8.46 handles reading data requested by SAYEH from its memory image. If ReadMem is 1, this block performs file and buffer handling and completes the read operation. If this signal is 0 (see the last part of the code), MemDataReady is set to 0, and MemoryData is set to high-impedance. If ReadMem is 1, the always block of Fig. 8.46 checks to see if the addressed word is in a page that is in the SayehRAM buffer. If it is not there, and the existing buffer has data written into it (dirty == 1), then the present page image from SayehRAM buffer is written to the page it belongs. If dirty is not 1, the page image in the buffer can simply be overwritten with the contents of the requested page. The $sformat shown in this part of the code, generates a string corresponding to the dirty page for creating the file name to open for writing. When reading from a page whose image is not in SayehRAM, the $readmemh task shown in Fig. 8.46 reads the file that corresponds to this page, and loads it into SayehRAM buffer. For generating the proper file name, the $sformat task converts prePage integer page number to a two-character string. The argument of $readmemh concatenates this string with the rest of the file name and reads its contents. When SayehRAM has the data of the addressed location of memory, physicalAddress that is the least significant 12 bits of SAYEH address bus is used for reading data from SayehRAM. This data is placed on MemoryData, and MemDataReady is issued. MemoryData is assigned to the CPU Databus with an assign statement. 8.3.4.4 Memory write procedure. Figure 8.47 shows the MemoryWrite always block. Handling nonexisting pages, dirty pages, address calculations, and file name generation of this block are similar to that discussed in conjunction with the MemoryRead block. As shown near the end of code of Fig. 8.47, when writing, the 12-bit physicalAddress corresponding to the least significant bits of Addressbus is used to address the SayehRAM buffer. After a write, dirty is set to indicate that page-data in SayehRAM is different from its corresponding file. As discussed above, this flag is used to indicate if an unwanted page can simply be ignored or its file image needs to be updated. The last part of the outline Verilog code of Fig. 8.45 shows instantiation of SAYEH. This processor issues ReadMem and WriteMem signals that activate MemoryRead and MemoryWrite always blocks discussed above. In the next section a program written for SAYEH in its assembly language is discussed. This program is initially entered in inst.mem file and is translated and applied to SAYEH by the testbench discussed here. 8.3.5 Sorting test program Figure 8.48 shows a sorting program for SAYEH. This program reads data starting from the CPU memory and sorts them in descending order. The number of data item to sort is in location 768 and data begins in the next memory location. This sorting program uses two loops for the sorting to be done. When completed, the CPU is put into the halt state. The program shown in Fig. 8.48 is translated into its hexadecimal equivalent and is put in SayehRAM.hex file. As discussed in the previous section, SAYEH testbench reads instructions from this file and applies to the CPU. 8.3.6 SAYEH hardware realization The SAYEH CPU described in this chapter has been synthesized and programmed into a number of FPGAs and tested on Altera development boards.

